With the present volume, the publication of Professor Georg Sverdrup’s Selected Collected Writings is brought to its conclusion, in accordance with the plan that was laid when this work was begun nearly four years ago. It may therefore be fitting here to offer a very brief overview of the course of this undertaking.

When Professor Sverdrup, on the 31st of May 1907, after but a single day of illness, was taken away from the field of labor, there was felt—beside the bitter loss occasioned by his death—something deeply sorrowful in the fact that he had not been granted more time for literary pursuits. For he had, though in part already weary, entertained the thought that little by little he might withdraw from the active, enlightening life of the people, in order to devote his final years to the task of arranging and working through the material he possessed, and also of presenting a coherent exposition of the Christian congregation. But God willed it otherwise. For us who yet live, this will always be felt as a great and irreparable loss; yet the Lord knoweth His works, and knoweth that they are the wisest and the best.

When, approximately a year after Professor Sverdrup’s death, the undersigned received requests—both from his son, Professor George Sverdrup, Jr., and from other friends—to undertake the publication of his literary remains, the first question concerned the gathering together of all material that might be found. And it is a dear duty to me here to express my sincere thanks to the many who, with goodwill and self-sacrifice, assisted me in this work. After some months of searching, I had assembled approximately six hundred and fifty titles, and had reason to believe that I had secured at least the very greater part. — I have not, however, included here the author’s reflections and sermons in “Luthersk” from the years 1884–1890. — When the work of selection was concluded, the entire body of material became the property of the library of Augsburg Seminary.

From this mass of titles there was to be made a selection which could, at the same time, represent the greater part of the material at hand. The limitation thus imposed also came to determine the choice of a common title, which, in a satisfactory manner, contains within itself a self-contradiction: Selected Collected Writings. The work, as it now lies before the reader, comprises approximately four hundred titles.

It was no easy matter, and that it has not always satisfied me, I readily admit. A particular difficulty was also occasioned by the fact that, owing to circumstances, it did not become possible for me to arrive at a final decision concerning the entire selection before publication was begun.

As regards the publication and arrangement otherwise, I had, of course, no directions from the author himself by which to guide me. The only thing I knew was that, in his time, when Pastor O. B. Kristiansen arranged a separate edition of the articles in *The Free Church Fellowship*, he had expressed the wish that attention should be drawn to the dates at which these articles were written, and that they should be reproduced without alterations. This rule I also have followed. In this respect I refer to what I stated in the preface to the first volume, namely, “that no alterations have been made except those of a purely orthographical and typographical nature.” For I have considered it right, so far as possible, to employ the linguistic form which the author himself used in the last years before his death. Thus all plural verb forms have been removed, and so forth. On the other hand, I do not consider it advisable that, in a work such as this, principled alterations should be undertaken. There may arise the question whether a particular treatise should be included or not; but there can be no question of altering a man’s words, when one no longer has any opportunity of discovering how he himself, in such a case, would have altered them.

By the brief notices with which I have accompanied the various sections, I have sought to provide a faithful picture of the historical circumstances under which the articles came into being. The very limited space which these notices necessarily had at their disposal has, of course, made it unavoidable that they are in many respects highly incomplete. Yet it is my hope that they will at least be of some use, and that in no case will they serve as an obstacle to the understanding of Professor Sverdrup’s work.

The present volume contains, as will be seen, essentially missionary reading. I am convinced that the friends of mission will rejoice that the author’s reflections on mission are now made available in collected form. Yet I regret that an entire series of sermons and religious meditations could not be given a place within the framework of this work. It is my hope that provision will in due time be made for their publication.

It is to be hoped that the personal and subject index found at the conclusion of this volume, despite all its imperfections, will be of some use to those who in earnest desire to take up the study of Professor Sverdrup’s writings. The preparation of such an index has its difficulties, which it is impossible for a man without practice therein fully to overcome, especially when the necessary time for the execution of the work is lacking.

The last time Professor Sverdrup delivered lectures on that part of Christian dogmatics which treats of the congregation, he based these upon a series of “dogmatic paragraphs,” which he dictated for the students. Through an oversight these were not included in Volume II, on the Congregation, and are therefore published in this volume (pp. XIII–XVI) as a Supplement. The brief, concise, and pregnant manner of expression in these paragraphs finds its sufficient explanation in the circumstance that they formed the basic outlines for a longer series of lectures.

In 1892 an agreement was reached with the Norwegian Missionary Society to the effect that the Norwegian Lutherans in America should receive their mission field as their own mission field. (See Volume I, pp. 225 ff.) Professor Sverdrup and Pastor P. A. Rasmussen had been chosen to travel to Norway in order to attend the General Assembly in Stavanger, with the purpose of having this matter advanced. From many statements by Professor Sverdrup—several of which are found in Volume IV of the present work—one will understand how the interest of mission, notwithstanding differences of preference in other respects, drew these two men together. Professor Sverdrup was unable to travel to the General Assembly. But on the 12th of July, 1892, he received from Pastor Rasmussen a brief telegram, a facsimile of which is included in this volume, reporting that the Norwegian Lutherans in America had received as their mission field the region stretching from St. Augustine southward, comprising the two Zanoff tribes and the heathen peoples dwelling south of these. It is known to the editor that Professor Sverdrup regarded this telegram as a treasure, which he valued highly.

In conclusion, only this further word: It is my hope that Professor Sverdrup’s collected writings may eventually come to include also a seventh volume. I have envisioned that this should contain, first, a biographical sketch of the author, together with a characterization of his view of life and his fundamental Christian convictions. Next, a selection of letters. There undoubtedly exist not a few such hitherto unknown letters of considerable interest which those closest to Professor Sverdrup have been permitted to receive from him. A suitable selection would be of exceedingly great interest also to the general public. And should there still be room for more, in order to give this volume the same size as the others, there yet remains various material which ought to be published. I hope that there may be found men who are willing to undertake the not easy labor which the publication of a volume with the content here indicated would entail.

Finally, I wish to extend my sincere thanks to all who in various ways have shown their interest in this work. In particular it is a heartfelt need for me to thank Forretnings Boghandel and its manager, Mr. O. A. Sain, who not only made it possible for this relatively large and costly work to be published, but who has also shown me personally an unfailing goodwill and accommodation, which in a significant degree has lightened the labor of publication.

May Professor Sverdrup’s collected writings thus become a blessing, as their author himself is.

Augsburg Seminary, the 31st of May, 1912.

Andreas Helland.